<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>A Play</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="a-play" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Play</h2>
			<p>вҖңPavel Vassilyevitch, thereвҖҷs a lady here, asking for you,вҖқ Luka announced. вҖңSheвҖҷs been waiting a good hour.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>Pavel Vassilyevitch had only just finished lunch. Hearing of the lady, he frowned and said:</p>
			<p>вҖңOh, damn her! Tell her IвҖҷm busy.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңShe has been here five times already, Pavel Vassilyevitch. She says she really must see you.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ SheвҖҷs almost crying.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHвҖҷmвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ very well, then, ask her into the study.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Without haste Pavel Vassilyevitch put on his coat, took a pen in one hand, and a book in the other, and trying to look as though he were very busy he went into the study. There the visitor was awaiting himвҒ вҖ”a large stout lady with a red, beefy face, in spectacles. She looked very respectable, and her dress was more than fashionable (she had on a crinolette of four storeys and a high hat with a reddish bird in it). On seeing him she turned up her eyes and folded her hands in supplication.</p>
			<p>вҖңYou donвҖҷt remember me, of course,вҖқ she began in a high masculine tenor, visibly agitated. вҖңIвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I have had the pleasure of meeting you at the Hrutskys.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I am <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr>В Murashkin.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ aвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ aвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ hвҖҷmвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Sit down! What can I do for you?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYouвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ you seeвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ IвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ IвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ the lady went on, sitting down and becoming still more agitated. вҖңYou donвҖҷt remember me.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ IвҖҷm <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr>В Murashkin.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ You see IвҖҷm a great admirer of your talent and always read your articles with great enjoyment.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ DonвҖҷt imagine IвҖҷm flattering youвҒ вҖ”God forbid!вҒ вҖ”IвҖҷm only giving honour where honour is due.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I am always reading youвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ always! To some extent I am myself not a stranger to literatureвҒ вҖ”that is, of courseвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I will not venture to call myself an authoress, butвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ still I have added my little quotaвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I have published at different times three stories for children.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ You have not read them, of course.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I have translated a good deal andвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ and my late brother used to write for <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Cause</i>.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңTo be sureвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ erвҒ вҖ”erвҒ вҖ”erвҒ вҖ”What can I do for you?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYou seeвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ (the lady cast down her eyes and turned redder) I know your talentsвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ your views, Pavel Vassilyevitch, and I have been longing to learn your opinion, or more exactlyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ to ask your advice. I must tell you I have perpetrated a play, my firstbornвҒ вҖ”<i xml:lang="fr">pardon pour lвҖҷexpression</i>!вҒ вҖ”and before sending it to the Censor I should like above all things to have your opinion on it.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Nervously, with the flutter of a captured bird, the lady fumbled in her skirt and drew out a fat manuscript.</p>
			<p>Pavel Vassilyevitch liked no articles but his own. When threatened with the necessity of reading other peopleвҖҷs, or listening to them, he felt as though he were facing the cannonвҖҷs mouth. Seeing the manuscript he took fright and hastened to say:</p>
			<p>вҖңVery good,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ leave it,вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ IвҖҷll read it.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңPavel Vassilyevitch,вҖқ the lady said languishingly, clasping her hands and raising them in supplication, вҖңI know youвҖҷre busy.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Your every minute is precious, and I know youвҖҷre inwardly cursing me at this moment, butвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Be kind, allow me to read you my play.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Do be so very sweet!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI should be delightedвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ faltered Pavel Vassilyevitch; вҖңbut, Madam, IвҖҷmвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ IвҖҷm very busy.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ IвҖҷmвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ IвҖҷm obliged to set off this minute.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңPavel Vassilyevitch,вҖқ moaned the lady and her eyes filled with tears, вҖңIвҖҷm asking a sacrifice! I am insolent, I am intrusive, but be magnanimous. Tomorrow IвҖҷm leaving for Kazan and I should like to know your opinion today. Grant me half an hour of your attentionвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ only one half-hourвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I implore you!вҖқ</p>
			<p>Pavel Vassilyevitch was cotton-wool at core, and could not refuse. When it seemed to him that the lady was about to burst into sobs and fall on her knees, he was overcome with confusion and muttered helplessly.</p>
			<p>вҖңVery well; certainlyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I will listenвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I will give you half an hour.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The lady uttered a shriek of joy, took off her hat and settling herself, began to read. At first she read a scene in which a footman and a house maid, tidying up a sumptuous drawing room, talked at length about their young lady, Anna Sergyevna, who was building a school and a hospital in the village. When the footman had left the room, the maidservant pronounced a monologue to the effect that education is light and ignorance is darkness; then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr>В Murashkin brought the footman back into the drawing room and set him uttering a long monologue concerning his master, the General, who disliked his daughterвҖҷs views, intended to marry her to a rich <i xml:lang="de">kammer junker</i>, and held that the salvation of the people lay in unadulterated ignorance. Then, when the servants had left the stage, the young lady herself appeared and informed the audience that she had not slept all night, but had been thinking of Valentin Ivanovitch, who was the son of a poor teacher and assisted his sick father gratuitously. Valentin had studied all the sciences, but had no faith in friendship nor in love; he had no object in life and longed for death, and therefore she, the young lady, must save him.</p>
			<p>Pavel Vassilyevitch listened, and thought with yearning anguish of his sofa. He scanned the lady viciously, felt her masculine tenor thumping on his eardrums, understood nothing, and thought:</p>
			<p>вҖңThe devil sent youвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ as though I wanted to listen to your tosh! ItвҖҷs not my fault youвҖҷve written a play, is it? My God! what a thick manuscript! What an infliction!вҖқ</p>
			<p>Pavel Vassilyevitch glanced at the wall where the portrait of his wife was hanging and remembered that his wife had asked him to buy and bring to their summer cottage five yards of tape, a pound of cheese, and some tooth-powder.</p>
			<p>вҖңI hope IвҖҷve not lost the pattern of that tape,вҖқ he thought, вҖңwhere did I put it? I believe itвҖҷs in my blue reefer jacket.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Those wretched flies have covered her portrait with spots already, I must tell Olga to wash the glass.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ SheвҖҷs reading the twelfth scene, so we must soon be at the end of the first act. As though inspiration were possible in this heat and with such a mountain of flesh, too! Instead of writing plays sheвҖҷd much better eat cold vinegar hash and sleep in a cellar.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYou donвҖҷt think that monologueвҖҷs a little too long?вҖқ the lady asked suddenly, raising her eyes.</p>
			<p>Pavel Vassilyevitch had not heard the monologue, and said in a voice as guilty as though not the lady but he had written that monologue:</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, no, not at all. ItвҖҷs very nice.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>The lady beamed with happiness and continued reading:</p>
			<table epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anna</td>
						<td>
							<p>You are consumed by analysis. Too early you have ceased to live in the heart and have put your faith in the intellect.</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valentin</td>
						<td>
							<p>What do you mean by the heart? That is a concept of anatomy. As a conventional term for what are called the feelings, I do not admit it.</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anna</td>
						<td>
							<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Confused.</i> And love? Surely that is not merely a product of the association of ideas? Tell me frankly, have you ever loved?</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valentin</td>
						<td>
							<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Bitterly.</i> Let us not touch on old wounds not yet healed. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A pause.</i> What are you thinking of?</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>During the sixteenth scene Pavel Vassilyevitch yawned, and accidently made with his teeth the sound dogs make when they catch a fly. He was dismayed at this unseemly sound, and to cover it assumed an expression of rapt attention.</p>
			<p>вҖңScene seventeen! When will it end?вҖқ he thought. вҖңOh, my God! If this torture is prolonged another ten minutes I shall shout for the police. ItвҖҷs insufferable.вҖқ</p>
			<p>But at last the lady began reading more loudly and more rapidly, and finally raising her voice she read, вҖңCurtain.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Pavel Vassilyevitch uttered a faint sigh and was about to get up, but the lady promptly turned the page and went on reading.</p>
			<div epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<header>
					<p>Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></p>
				</header>
				<p>Scene, a village street. On right, School. On left, Hospital. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Villagers</b> male and female, sitting on the hospital steps.</p>
			</div>
			<p>вҖңExcuse me,вҖқ Pavel Vassilyevitch broke in, вҖңhow many acts are there?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңFive,вҖқ answered the lady, and at once, as though fearing her audience might escape her, she went on rapidly.</p>
			<div epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Valentin</b> is looking out of the schoolhouse window. In the background <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Villagers</b> can be seen taking their goods to the inn.</p>
			</div>
			<p>Like a man condemned to be executed and convinced of the impossibility of a reprieve, Pavel Vassilyevitch gave up expecting the end, abandoned all hope, and simply tried to prevent his eyes from closing, and to retain an expression of attention on his face.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The future when the lady would finish her play and depart seemed to him so remote that he did not even think of it.</p>
			<p>вҖңTroooвҒ вҖ”tooвҒ вҖ”tooвҒ вҖ”tooвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ the ladyвҖҷs voice sounded in his ears. вҖңTrooвҒ вҖ”tooвҒ вҖ”tooвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ shвҒ вҖ”shвҒ вҖ”shвҒ вҖ”shвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI forgot to take my soda,вҖқ he thought. вҖңWhat am I thinking about? OhвҒ вҖ”my soda.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Most likely I shall have a bilious attack.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ ItвҖҷs extraordinary, Smirnovsky swills vodka all day long and yet he never has a bilious attack.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ ThereвҖҷs a bird settled on the windowвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ a sparrow.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>Pavel Vassilyevitch made an effort to unglue his strained and closing eyelids, yawned without opening his mouth, and stared at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr>В Murashkin. She grew misty and swayed before his eyes, turned into a triangle and her head pressed against the ceiling.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
			<table epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valentin</td>
						<td>
							<p>No, let me depart.</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anna</td>
						<td>
							<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">In dismay.</i> Why?</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valentin</td>
						<td>
							<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> She has turned pale! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To her.</i> Do not force me to explain. Sooner would I die than you should know the reason.</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anna</td>
						<td>
							<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">After a pause.</i> You cannot go away.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>The lady began to swell, swelled to an immense size, and melted into the dingy atmosphere of the studyвҒ вҖ”only her moving mouth was visible; then she suddenly dwindled to the size of a bottle, swayed from side to side, and with the table retreated to the further end of the roomвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
			<table epub:type="z3998:drama">
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valentin</td>
						<td>
							<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Holding <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Anna</b> in his arms.</i> You have given me new life! You have shown me an object to live for! You have renewed me as the Spring rain renews the awakened earth! ButвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ it is too late, too late! The ill that gnaws at my heart is beyond cure.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>Pavel Vassilyevitch started and with dim and smarting eyes stared at the reading lady; for a minute he gazed fixedly as though understanding nothing.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
			<div epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
				<header>
					<p>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span></p>
				</header>
				<p>The same. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Baron</b> and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Police Inspector</b> with assistants.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valentin</td>
							<td>
								<p>Take me!</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anna</td>
							<td>
								<p>I am his! Take me too! Yes, take me too! I love him, I love him more than life!</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Baron</td>
							<td>
								<p>Anna Sergyevna, you forget that you are ruining your father.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</div>
			<p>The lady began swelling again.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Looking round him wildly Pavel Vassilyevitch got up, yelled in a deep, unnatural voice, snatched from the table a heavy paperweight, and beside himself, brought it down with all his force on the authoressвҖҷs head.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>вҖңGive me in charge, IвҖҷve killed her!вҖқ he said to the maidservant who ran in, a minute later.</p>
			<p>The jury acquitted him.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
