<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Head-Gardner's Story</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section epub:type="chapter" id="the-head-gardners-story">
    
    <h2>
      THE HEAD-GARDENER'S STORY
    </h2>
    <p>
      A SALE of flowers was taking place in Count N.'s greenhouses. The
      purchasers were few in number&mdash;a landowner who was a neighbor of
      mine, a young timber-merchant, and myself. While the workmen were carrying
      out our magnificent purchases and packing them into the carts, we sat at
      the entry of the greenhouse and chatted about one thing and another. It is
      extremely pleasant to sit in a garden on a still April morning, listening
      to the birds, and watching the flowers brought out into the open air and
      basking in the sunshine.
    </p>
    <p>
      The head-gardener, Mihail Karlovitch, a venerable old man with a full
      shaven face, wearing a fur waistcoat and no coat, superintended the
      packing of the plants himself, but at the same time he listened to our
      conversation in the hope of hearing something new. He was an intelligent,
      very good-hearted man, respected by everyone. He was for some reason
      looked upon by everyone as a German, though he was in reality on his
      father's side Swedish, on his mother's side Russian, and attended the
      Orthodox church. He knew Russian, Swedish, and German. He had read a good
      deal in those languages, and nothing one could do gave him greater
      pleasure than lending him some new book or talking to him, for instance,
      about Ibsen.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had his weaknesses, but they were innocent ones: he called himself the
      head gardener, though there were no under-gardeners; the expression of his
      face was unusually dignified and haughty; he could not endure to be
      contradicted, and liked to be listened to with respect and attention.
    </p>
    <p>
      "That young fellow there I can recommend to you as an awful rascal," said
      my neighbor, pointing to a laborer with a swarthy, gipsy face, who drove
      by with the water-barrel. "Last week he was tried in the town for burglary
      and was acquitted; they pronounced him mentally deranged, and yet look at
      him, he is the picture of health. Scoundrels are very often acquitted
      nowadays in Russia on grounds of abnormality and aberration, yet these
      acquittals, these unmistakable proofs of an indulgent attitude to crime,
      lead to no good. They demoralize the masses, the sense of justice is
      blunted in all as they become accustomed to seeing vice unpunished, and
      you know in our age one may boldly say in the words of Shakespeare that in
      our evil and corrupt age virtue must ask forgiveness of vice."
    </p>
    <p>
      "That's very true," the merchant assented. "Owing to these frequent
      acquittals, murder and arson have become much more common. Ask the
      peasants."
    </p>
    <p>
      Mihail Karlovitch turned towards us and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      "As far as I am concerned, gentlemen, I am always delighted to meet with
      these verdicts of not guilty. I am not afraid for morality and justice
      when they say 'Not guilty,' but on the contrary I feel pleased. Even when
      my conscience tells me the jury have made a mistake in acquitting the
      criminal, even then I am triumphant. Judge for yourselves, gentlemen; if
      the judges and the jury have more faith in <i>man</i> than in evidence,
      material proofs, and speeches for the prosecution, is not that faith <i>in
      man</i> in itself higher than any ordinary considerations? Such faith is
      only attainable by those few who understand and feel Christ."
    </p>
    <p>
      "A fine thought," I said.
    </p>
    <p>
      "But it's not a new one. I remember a very long time ago I heard a legend
      on that subject. A very charming legend," said the gardener, and he
      smiled. "I was told it by my grandmother, my father's mother, an excellent
      old lady. She told me it in Swedish, and it does not sound so fine, so
      classical, in Russian."
    </p>
    <p>
      But we begged him to tell it and not to be put off by the coarseness of
      the Russian language. Much gratified, he deliberately lighted his pipe,
      looked angrily at the laborers, and began:
    </p>
    <p>
      "There settled in a certain little town a solitary, plain, elderly
      gentleman called Thomson or Wilson&mdash;but that does not matter; the
      surname is not the point. He followed an honorable profession: he was a
      doctor. He was always morose and unsociable, and only spoke when required
      by his profession. He never visited anyone, never extended his
      acquaintance beyond a silent bow, and lived as humbly as a hermit. The
      fact was, he was a learned man, and in those days learned men were not
      like other people. They spent their days and nights in contemplation, in
      reading and in healing disease, looked upon everything else as trivial,
      and had no time to waste a word. The inhabitants of the town understood
      this, and tried not to worry him with their visits and empty chatter. They
      were very glad that God had sent them at last a man who could heal
      diseases, and were proud that such a remarkable man was living in their
      town. 'He knows everything,' they said about him.
    </p>
    <p>
      "But that was not enough. They ought to have also said, 'He loves
      everyone.' In the breast of that learned man there beat a wonderful
      angelic heart. Though the people of that town were strangers and not his
      own people, yet he loved them like children, and did not spare himself for
      them. He was himself ill with consumption, he had a cough, but when he was
      summoned to the sick he forgot his own illness he did not spare himself
      and, gasping for breath, climbed up the hills however high they might be.
      He disregarded the sultry heat and the cold, despised thirst and hunger.
      He would accept no money and strange to say, when one of his patients
      died, he would follow the coffin with the relations, weeping.
    </p>
    <p>
      "And soon he became so necessary to the town that the inhabitants wondered
      how they could have got on before without the man. Their gratitude knew no
      bounds. Grown-up people and children, good and bad alike, honest men and
      cheats&mdash;all in fact, respected him and knew his value. In the little
      town and all the surrounding neighborhood there was no man who would allow
      himself to do anything disagreeable to him; indeed, they would never have
      dreamed of it. When he came out of his lodging, he never fastened the
      doors or windows, in complete confidence that there was no thief who could
      bring himself to do him wrong. He often had in the course of his medical
      duties to walk along the highroads, through the forests and mountains
      haunted by numbers of hungry vagrants; but he felt that he was in perfect
      security.
    </p>
    <p>
      "One night he was returning from a patient when robbers fell upon him in
      the forest, but when they recognized him, they took off their hats
      respectfully and offered him something to eat. When he answered that he
      was not hungry, they gave him a warm wrap and accompanied him as far as
      the town, happy that fate had given them the chance in some small way to
      show their gratitude to the benevolent man. Well, to be sure, my
      grandmother told me that even the horses and the cows and the dogs knew
      him and expressed their joy when they met him.
    </p>
    <p>
      "And this man who seemed by his sanctity to have guarded himself from
      every evil, to whom even brigands and frenzied men wished nothing but
      good, was one fine morning found murdered. Covered with blood, with his
      skull broken, he was lying in a ravine, and his pale face wore an
      expression of amazement. Yes, not horror but amazement was the emotion
      that had been fixed upon his face when he saw the murderer before him. You
      can imagine the grief that overwhelmed the inhabitants of the town and the
      surrounding districts. All were in despair, unable to believe their eyes,
      wondering who could have killed the man. The judges who conducted the
      inquiry and examined the doctor's body said: 'Here we have all the signs
      of a murder, but as there is not a man in the world capable of murdering
      our doctor, obviously it was not a case of murder, and the combination of
      evidence is due to simple chance. We must suppose that in the darkness he
      fell into the ravine of himself and was mortally injured.'
    </p>
    <p>
      "The whole town agreed with this opinion. The doctor was buried, and
      nothing more was said about a violent death. The existence of a man who
      could have the baseness and wickedness to kill the doctor seemed
      incredible. There is a limit even to wickedness, isn't there?
    </p>
    <p>
      "All at once, would you believe it, chance led them to discovering the
      murderer. A vagrant who had been many times convicted, notorious for his
      vicious life, was seen selling for drink a snuff-box and watch that had
      belonged to the doctor. When he was questioned he was confused, and
      answered with an obvious lie. A search was made, and in his bed was found
      a shirt with stains of blood on the sleeves, and a doctor's lancet set in
      gold. What more evidence was wanted? They put the criminal in prison. The
      inhabitants were indignant, and at the same time said:
    </p>
    <p>
      "'It's incredible! It can't be so! Take care that a mistake is not made;
      it does happen, you know, that evidence tells a false tale.'
    </p>
    <p>
      "At his trial the murderer obstinately denied his guilt. Everything was
      against him, and to be convinced of his guilt was as easy as to believe
      that this earth is black; but the judges seem to have gone mad: they
      weighed every proof ten times, looked distrustfully at the witnesses,
      flushed crimson and sipped water.... The trial began early in the morning
      and was only finished in the evening.
    </p>
    <p>
      "'Accused!' the chief judge said, addressing the murderer, 'the court has
      found you guilty of murdering Dr. So-and-so, and has sentenced you to....'
    </p>
    <p>
      "The chief judge meant to say 'to the death penalty,' but he dropped from
      his hands the paper on which the sentence was written, wiped the cold
      sweat from his face, and cried out:
    </p>
    <p>
      "'No! May God punish me if I judge wrongly, but I swear he is not guilty.
      I cannot admit the thought that there exists a man who would dare to
      murder our friend the doctor! A man could not sink so low!'
    </p>
    <p>
      "'There cannot be such a man!' the other judges assented.
    </p>
    <p>
      "'No,' the crowd cried. 'Let him go!'
    </p>
    <p>
      "The murderer was set free to go where he chose, and not one soul blamed
      the court for an unjust verdict. And my grandmother used to say that for
      such faith in humanity God forgave the sins of all the inhabitants of that
      town. He rejoices when people believe that man is His image and semblance,
      and grieves if, forgetful of human dignity, they judge worse of men than
      of dogs. The sentence of acquittal may bring harm to the inhabitants of
      the town, but on the other hand, think of the beneficial influence upon
      them of that faith in man&mdash;a faith which does not remain dead, you
      know; it raises up generous feelings in us, and always impels us to love
      and respect every man. Every man! And that is important."
    </p>
    <p>
      Mihail Karlovitch had finished. My neighbor would have urged some
      objection, but the head-gardener made a gesture that signified that he did
      not like objections; then he walked away to the carts, and, with an
      expression of dignity, went on looking after the packing.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0019" id="link2H_4_0019">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
</section></body></html>
